📝 `blog`: add GSoC 2-week update (#177)
aiidateam/aiida-website: src/blog/gsoc-2026-aiida-natural-language.md

That is where the team's expertise becomes essential.
The project is genuinely collaborative, which is what makes it interesting.

---

> ## Weeks 3 & 4: building the REST API and MCP tools

Author: ```suggestion
## Weeks 3 & 4: setting up the MCP tools and the first agent
```

Following the end of the community bonding period, the first official coding weeks kicked off with a mix of high-level architecture alignment and hands-on tool development.

### Alignment and planning

> To align on the project structure, I discussed with the mentor and we also had a dedicated session with AiiDA's creator, Giovanni.

Author: ```suggestion
To align on the project structure, I discussed with the mentor and we also had a dedicated session with the group leader at PSI and AiiDA's original creator, Giovanni Pizzi.
```

We discussed project timeline, and the specific modules to be included in our architecture.
Having this high-level feedback early on was extremely valuable for mapping out how the agents will interact with AiiDA's database.

### The REST API and building the first tools

> With the architecture aligned, the first concrete technical task was to connect our Model Context Protocol (MCP) server to AiiDA.

Author: "our Model Context Protocol server" sounds like we had already built it at that stage, and then connected it. But, didn't we basically build it there (well, the tools)? Maybe I'd phrase it slightly differently, but, up to you!

> We decided that wrapping `aiida-restapi` (an external package that exposes Pydantic models and handlers for AiiDA) was much cleaner than hand-rolling AiiDA access from scratch.

Author: I'm just not sure about the "hand-rolling AiiDA access from scratch" here. Access to AiiDA's DB is available in `aiida-core` itself, namely, through the `orm` and the `QueryBuilder`, so, using code from `aiida-restapi` is more about re-using code, and the fact that the `aiida-restapi` is intended as the entry point for external data access, e.g., via the web, but also via the upcoming GUI we are working on for AiiDA:

```suggestion
We decided it was cleaner to build on `aiida-restapi`, an external package that already provides the filtering, pagination, and projection logic we would otherwise have written ourselves on top of `aiida-core`'s `orm` and `QueryBuilder`.
```

We wanted to import and call these Pydantic models in-process, without standing up a live web server, to serve as clean building blocks for our tool schema.

However, the initial integration was not smooth.
We ran into compatibility issues and errors where the existing REST API code wasn't quite working for our needs.

> This sent us back to the drawing board to think through the query layer and single-node database access.

Author: ```suggestion
This was mainly due to a recent rework of the use of pydantic in AiiDA's `orm` module in [PR #6990](https://www.github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6990) that required changes to `aiida-restapi` that were still under review.

By pulling the latest updates and pull requests from the `aiida-restapi` repository, we managed to integrate it and make the tool schemas work.
```

> This sent us back to the drawing board to think through the query layer and single-node database access.

Author: ```suggestion
This was mainly due to a recent rework of the use of pydantic in AiiDA's `orm` module in [PR #6990](https://www.github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6990) that required changes to `aiida-restapi` that were still under review.
By pulling in the latest updates and pull requests from the `aiida-restapi` repository, we managed to integrate it and make the tool schemas work.
```

By pulling the latest updates and pull requests from the `aiida-restapi` repository, we managed to integrate it and make the tool schemas work.

Through this process, we refined our tool-design strategy:

- For querying collections of nodes, we use the `NodeService` wrapper from `aiida-restapi`.

> - For simple single-node operations (like fetching attributes of a loaded node), we bypass the service layer and call `aiida-core`'s native ORM directly to avoid unnecessary query round-trips and database overhead.

Author: ```suggestion
- For simple single-node operations (like fetching attributes of an already-loaded node), we call `aiida-core`'s ORM directly, which is simpler than adding an unnecessary layer of `aiida-restapi` indirection.
```

With this foundation, I built and defined the first six MCP tools for our server.

### Collaborative feedback

A highlight of these past two weeks has been the close collaboration with the mentor.
We did what felt like asynchronous pair programming; after developing the tools on a separate branch, I opened the pull request on GitHub.
This collaboration was incredibly active and considerate, providing detailed, constructive feedback on the design.
We went through the review process, made necessary adjustments, and successfully refined the pull request.

### Initial agent configuration

With the tool layer taking shape, I also started setting up the initial configuration for the agents.
Getting the analysis agent configured early is critical so that we can begin testing end-to-end interactions with our newly created tools.

> Laying this groundwork now ensures we stay on track with our GSoC timeline.

Author: Maybe move this above, as it's still technical. Also, you could possibly expand a bit here, as PR #4 should be almost ready, no? We can spin up an agent that can fetch some information from the DB, using the tools. Also, here, and before, could be interesting to link the PRs, no?
